[Docs] ES|QL Data Federation (#146945)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/query-languages/esql/esql-data-federation-overview.md

---
navigation_title: "Overview"
description: "ES|QL Data Federation queries data in external cloud storage from Elasticsearch without ingestion. Covers use cases, supported data source types, and file formats."
applies_to:
  stack: preview =9.5
  serverless: preview
products:
  - id: elasticsearch
---

> 

Reviewer: Treat this comment with a pinch of salt as I'm not sure what is the future plan for this documentation (perhaps you might want to move this page over to the narrative side), however, at this moment in time, I'd use this page as the parent page for this ES|QL Data Federation section. I'd replace 'esql-data-federation.md` entirely (don't think that page provides much value in its current form), as this overview page already does the job of user-orientation and wayfinding with lots of useful context. 

I think the only two child pages that are not linked on this page are [Manage access](https://docs-v3-preview.elastic.dev/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/146945/reference/query-languages/esql/esql-data-federation-security) and [Cluster settings](https://docs-v3-preview.elastic.dev/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/146945/reference/query-languages/esql/esql-data-federation-cluster-settings) -- which wouldn't be very difficult to work into.

Reviewer: I really like this page! It explained the new feature well (even to someone like me who knows nothing about it). 💟

Author: Good idea, I'll try to get that done too 👍

Author: addressed in https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/commit/eda61588cb19

# {{esql}} Data Federation overview

You can query data stored in compatible external data sources, using the same syntax you use for native indices and other index abstractions, without any ingestion into {{es}}.

## Why use federated data

Many organizations store large volumes of data in cloud object storage for cost and compliance reasons. Querying that data typically requires a separate tool like Apache Spark, Amazon Athena, or Trino, which means managing extra infrastructure and switching between query languages.

{{esql}} federated data enables you to query this data directly from {{es}}, with several advantages:

- **One language for all your data.** Use the same {{esql}} syntax for both indexed data and external data. No context-switching, no second query engine.
- **No extra infrastructure.** Query external data natively in {{es}} without deploying or managing additional compute services, catalogs, or connectors.

> - **Progressive acceleration.** Start by querying raw data directly in object storage. When specific datasets need faster performance, promote them into {{es}} for indexed search. Both tiers stay queryable with the same `FROM` syntax.

Reviewer: ```
Both tiers stay queryable with the same `FROM` syntax.
```

I found this sentence a bit confusing (because I don't understand the context of FROM), but maybe this is aimed at someone who knows more than me. In any case, maybe [a link to the FROM command](https://docs-v3-preview.elastic.dev/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/146945/reference/query-languages/esql/commands/from) (and specifying that it is a command) would help.

Author: Resolved in https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/commit/48b0b73a4a5d1d2a5af7a829bbb3963c0582f9b2

:::::::{stepper}

::::::{step} Your data lives in cloud storage
You have Parquet files, CSVs, or NDJSON sitting in a bucket. The data is not ingested into {{es}}.
::::::

::::::{step} You create a data source (the connection)
A [data source](esql-data-federation-sources.md) tells {{es}} where the storage is and how to authenticate. It stores the connection type, region, endpoint, and credentials. You only need to set up a data source once per region, and any number of datasets can read from it.
::::::

::::::{step} You create datasets (what to read)
Each [dataset](esql-data-federation-datasets.md) points at specific files in that storage. One data source can serve many datasets. When credentials rotate, you update the data source in one place without touching the datasets that reference it.

Datasets share the same namespace as indices, aliases, and [{{esql}} views](esql-views.md). A dataset cannot have the same name as an existing index, which is why `FROM` works the same way for both.
::::::

::::::{step} You query with FROM, just like a regular index

> Once a dataset exists, you query it the same way you query any {{es}} index. There is no special syntax for federated data. Use `FROM` with the dataset name, and {{es}} handles file discovery, format detection, compression, and schema inference automatically. For example, to return the first 10 rows from a dataset named `my_s3_bucket_logs`:

Reviewer: I think this is a more natural place to link to the [Query external datasets page](https://docs-v3-preview.elastic.dev/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/146945/reference/query-languages/esql/esql-data-federation-querying). You can still mention it in next steps, but you should also add a link here.

Author: Resolved in https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/commit/48b0b73a4a5d1d2a5af7a829bbb3963c0582f9b2

---
navigation_title: "Overview"
description: "ES|QL Data Federation queries data in external cloud storage from Elasticsearch without ingestion. Covers use cases, supported data source types, and file formats."
applies_to:
  stack: preview =9.5
  serverless: preview
products:
  - id: elasticsearch
---

> # {{esql}} Data Federation overview

Reviewer 2: fast follow: data federation exposed in key manage data pages as hints ("there is another way of doing data")

* https://www.elastic.co/docs/manage-data/data-store
* https://www.elastic.co/docs/manage-data/data-store/index-basics
* https://www.elastic.co/docs/manage-data/ingest

> You can query data stored in compatible external data sources, using the same syntax you use for native indices and other index abstractions, without any ingestion into {{es}}.

Reviewer 3: One sentence to remove the ES-native reader's first question: "where's my index and mapping?"

```suggestion
You can query data stored in compatible external data sources, using the same syntax you use for native indices and other index abstractions, without any ingestion into {{es}}. You query the files in place: nothing is copied into {{es}}, and there is no mapping to define up front: the schema is discovered from the files.
```

## Why use federated data

Many organizations store large volumes of data in cloud object storage for cost and compliance reasons. Querying that data typically requires a separate tool like Apache Spark, Amazon Athena, or Trino, which means managing extra infrastructure and switching between query languages.

{{esql}} federated data enables you to query this data directly from {{es}}, with several advantages:

- **One language for all your data.** Use the same {{esql}} syntax for both indexed data and external data. No context-switching, no second query engine.
- **No extra infrastructure.** Query external data natively in {{es}} without deploying or managing additional compute services, catalogs, or connectors.

> - **Progressive acceleration.** Start by querying raw data directly in object storage. When specific datasets need faster performance, promote them into {{es}} for indexed search. Both tiers stay queryable with the same {{esql}} syntax.

Reviewer 2: "no indexing/ingest" should be explicitly mentioned here

Author: addressed in https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/commit/eda61588cb19

> ## How it works

Reviewer 2: this is clear and cute and I like it

> Federated data requires two objects: a data source, which defines the connection, and one or more datasets, which define what to read. These steps walk through the model. For the setup procedures, refer to [data sources](esql-data-federation-sources.md) and [datasets](esql-data-federation-datasets.md).

Reviewer 2: I think we want the full names of these pages so they can be recognized (did the user already read them?)

```suggestion
Federated data requires two objects: a data source, which defines the connection, and one or more datasets, which define what to read. These steps walk through the model. For the setup procedures, refer to [](esql-data-federation-sources.md) and [](esql-data-federation-datasets.md).
```

Author: addressed in https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/commit/eda61588cb19

:::::::{stepper}

::::::{step} Your data lives in cloud storage
You have Parquet files, CSVs, or NDJSON sitting in a bucket. The data is not ingested into {{es}}.
::::::

::::::{step} You create a data source (the connection)

> A [data source](esql-data-federation-sources.md) tells {{es}} where the storage is and how to authenticate. It stores the connection type, region, endpoint, and credentials. You only need to set up a data source once per region, and any number of datasets can read from it.

Reviewer 2: why would people think they need to do this more than once per region? the region is stored in the data source and is part of what makes it unique, no? Is it more like "set up the data source once, read from multiple datasets"?

Author: addressed in https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/commit/eda61588cb19

::::::

::::::{step} You create datasets (what to read)

> Each [dataset](esql-data-federation-datasets.md) points at specific files in that storage. One data source can serve many datasets. When credentials rotate, you update the data source in one place without touching the datasets that reference it.

Reviewer 2: this description dives pretty deep into data sources ... sounds like that credential rotation should be in the previous step

Author: addressed in https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/commit/eda61588cb19

> Datasets share the same namespace as indices, aliases, and [{{esql}} views](esql-views.md). A dataset cannot have the same name as an existing index, which is why `FROM` works the same way for both.

Reviewer 3: Add data streams; state the list identically everywhere.

```suggestion
Datasets share the same namespace as indices, data streams, aliases, and [{{esql}} views](esql-views.md). A dataset cannot have the same name as any of them, which is why `FROM` works the same way for all of them.
```

> Datasets share the same namespace as indices, data streams, aliases, and [{{esql}} views](esql-views.md). A dataset cannot have the same name as any of them, which is why `FROM` works the same way for all of them.

Reviewer 2: feels like we got the logic backwards here. my guess:

the uniqueness requirement is not why a dataset works the same way as an index for `FROM` 

instead: datasets are set up so they work like these resources in the context of a `FROM` statement. to facilitate this, dataset names must be unique from all other resource names in this category (these resources also must have unique names from each other ... how do we talk about this elsewhere?)

Author: addressed in https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/commit/eda61588cb19

::::::

::::::{step} You query with FROM, just like a regular index
Once a dataset exists, you query it the same way you query any {{es}} index. There is no special syntax for federated data. Use `FROM` with the dataset name, and {{es}} handles file discovery, format detection, compression, and schema inference automatically. For example, to return the first 10 rows from a dataset named `my_s3_bucket_logs`:

```esql
FROM my_s3_bucket_logs
| LIMIT 10
```

:::{tip}
For a full worked example, refer to [get started with {{esql}} Data Federation](esql-data-federation-quickstart.md).
:::
::::::

:::::::

## Supported data source types

The following data source types are supported:

> :::{include} _snippets/data-federation/supported-data-source-types.md

Reviewer 3: Worth a light "what's coming" note here so a reader knows S3-only is a preview floor, not the ceiling — direction only, no dates. Something like:

> :::{note}
> Amazon S3 is the first supported data source type. Support for additional storage systems, including Google Cloud Storage and Azure Blob Storage, is planned.
> :::

Author: I'll add that to the existing "New data source types are available on {{serverless-short}} first." tip 👍

> For a full worked example, refer to [get started with {{esql}} Data Federation](esql-data-federation-quickstart.md).

Reviewer 2: I think worked reads as a little slangy personally but this might be just my inexperience with esql/more technical docs in this area

Author: addressed in https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/commit/d55d4ed2ee78

:::

:::{tip}

> New data source types are available on {{serverless-short}} first.

Author: ```suggestion
Amazon S3 is the first supported data source type. Support for additional storage systems, including Google Cloud Storage and Azure Blob Storage, is planned. New data source types are available on {{serverless-short}} first.
```

:::

## Supported file formats

Federated data sources can read the following file formats:

:::{include} _snippets/data-federation/supported-file-formats.md
:::

The format is detected automatically from the file extension. You can override this in the dataset settings if needed.

For details on type-specific settings and format options, refer to [select external datasets](esql-data-federation-datasets.md).

## Capabilities and limitations

Most {{esql}} processing commands and functions work on datasets. The execution engine is the same one used for native indices. Some capabilities that depend on Lucene or specialized data structures are not currently available.

> For the full list of limitations, refer to [query limitations](esql-data-federation-querying.md#limitations).

Reviewer 3: Plants the core idea plainly — datasets behave like indices in most places — and names exactly where the analogy stops.

```suggestion
Datasets behave like indices. In most places where {{esql}} accepts an index name, it accepts a dataset name too: `FROM`, `WHERE`, `STATS`, `SORT`, `EVAL`, `KEEP`, and the rest of the processing commands work the same way, on the same execution engine used for native indices. You can query a dataset on its own, or alongside indices, aliases, and views, in the same `FROM`.

The exceptions are operations that need structures only an {{es}} index has, such as the inverted index, doc values, or time series metadata. Relevance scoring returns `_score` as null, and `KNN`, `LOOKUP JOIN` with a dataset as the lookup target, and `TS` each fail with a clear error rather than returning wrong results. For the full list, refer to [query limitations](esql-data-federation-querying.md#limitations).
```

> For details on type-specific settings and format options, refer to [select external datasets](esql-data-federation-datasets.md).

Reviewer 2: this sentence structure is what we use when we refer to pages by name, so we should refer to the page by name

```suggestion
For details on type-specific settings and format options, refer to [](esql-data-federation-datasets.md).
```

Author: addressed in https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/commit/eda61588cb19

> ## Next steps

Reviewer 2: I think this would look nicer as a "Get started" because we are still at the beginning of our journey

Author: addressed in https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/commit/eda61588cb19
